# Portfolio Acquisition

The portfolio acquisition model is essentially a decision-making tool used to produce a bid that investors will make on an existing portfolio of loans. In this case, the loans are Home Equity Lines Of Credit because they are secured by the borrowers property, as is the ‘first mortgage’) typically with a maximum term of 15 years, with interest-only payments terminating in a final bullet payment. Borrowing is allowed up to the credit limit at any time at a variable rate tied to prime–can be fixed or floating–partial principal repayments are allowed, but not scheduled.

Prior to modeling, the portfolio will have been carved up into reasonably homogeneous pieces–which the present relatively simple model might be expected to represent fairly well. As part of this ‘risk screening’, the charge-off rates are estimated from the credit quality (and other characteristics) of the loans in the portfolio. How well this is done will affect the results produced by the model–this process will not be examined here.

Also prior to modeling, the loan portfolio will have been examined. This is used to decide whether the modeling assumptions and parameter estimates that are being used are reasonable. The model is then used to assess the sensitivity of the loan portfolio to changes in these modeling assumptions–teaser rates, charge-off rates, prepayment rates, etc.

Specifically, this model calculates the Net Present Value of the portfolio of loans (“NPV”, in this case the value above the hurdle rate and funding costs) and Internal Rate of Return (“IRR”) from a stream of expected monthly cashflows Ci, generated by the portfolio of loans.

This is a portfolio-level model–there is no information about the structure of the individual loans. The only structural information from the portfolio that is used in the model is: B: the total outstanding balance, : the number of active accounts, and various assumptions about setup costs, servicing fees, etc.

The prepayment model, which determines what percentage of the loans will prepay and close monthly. At present the model is static–there is no prepayment dependence on possible future changes in interest rates.

The repayment (pr partial prepayment) model, which estimates the rate at which loans are partially repayed (but not closed). At present this is fixed as a percentage of the currently outstanding balance.

The charged-off account model, which estimates the number of loans that will default each month. The loan portfolio should have already been assessed, which is where Charge-off rates are established.

The portfolio is modeled over a 10 year (120 month) horizon, despite the fact that some loans are renewable, and some have a longer or shorter lifespan. With the current model assumptions there is very little of the portfolio left after this time though, and such factors are likely absorbed into parameter uncertainties.

What follows is a brief overview of how the model generates expected cashflows from a portfolio. Throughout we are tracking:

	The total outstanding balance at the end of month i,
  
	The number of active accounts at the end of month i,
  
	The average account balance during month i.

References:

https://finpricing.com/lib/FiBondCoupon.html

https://derivatives.hcommons.org/interest-rate-derivatives/
